README.rst, before:

Abstract
===========

[to be written]

Getting Started
================

This repository is to make sure all figures and results are reproducible by anyone easily for this paper🤗.

If Github has issue (or too slow) to load the Jupyter Notebooks, you can go
http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/henrysky/astroNN_stars_foundation/tree/main/

Dependencies
----------------

This project uses `astroNN`_ and `MyGaiaDB`_ to manage `APOGEE`_ and `Gaia`_ data respectively, `PyTorch`_ as the deep learning framework. 
`mwdust`_ and `extinction`_ are used to calculate extinctions. `XGBoost`_ as a baseline machine learning method for comparison.

.. _astroNN: https://github.com/henrysky/astroNN
.. _MyGaiaDB: https://github.com/henrysky/MyGaiaDB
.. _APOGEE: https://www.sdss4.org/dr17/irspec/
.. _Gaia: https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dr3
.. _mwdust: https://github.com/jobovy/mwdust
.. _extinction: https://github.com/kbarbary/extinction
.. _XGBoost: https://github.com/dmlc/xgboost

..

    ⚠️ If you are using ``astroNN`` in the data reduction process which we did here, you have to set ``magicnumber = nan`` in astroNN `configuration file`_ for the code here to work properly.

.. _configuration file: https://astronn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quick_start.html#configuration-file

Jupyter Notebooks
--------------------------------------------------------

-   | `Dataset_Reduction.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to generate the dataset used by this paper. 
    | Terabytes of (mostly gaia) data need to be downloaded in the process to construct the datasets.
-   | `Inference_Spec2Labels.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar spectra to stellar parameters.
-   | `Inference_Labels2Spec.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar parameters to stellar spectra.
-   | `Inference_Spec2Spec.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar spectra to stellar spectra.
-   | `Inference_Labels2Labels.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar parameters to stellar parameters.

.. _Dataset_Reduction.ipynb: Dataset_Reduction.ipynb
.. _Inference_Spec2Labels.ipynb: Inference_Spec2Labels.ipynb
.. _Inference_Labels2Spec.ipynb: Inference_Labels2Spec.ipynb
.. _Inference_Spec2Spec.ipynb: Inference_Spec2Spec.ipynb
.. _Inference_Labels2Labels.ipynb: Inference_Labels2Labels.ipynb

Python Script
--------------------------------------------------------

If you use this training script to train your own model, please notice that details of your system will be 
saved in the model file as ``training_system_info.txt`` for developers to debug. Delete the file before
you share your model with others if you concern about privacy. 

-   | `training.py`_
    | Python script to train the model.

.. _training.py: training.py

Model
--------------------------------------------------------

-   | ``model_torch`` is a trained `PyTorch`_ model
    | The model has ~8.8 millions parameters trained on ~16 millions "non-linear" tokens from ~397k stars with 118 unque "unit vector" tokens.

.. _PyTorch: https://pytorch.org/

Graphics 
--------------------------------------------------------

-   | `model_overview.drawio`_
    | Source for Figure 1 in the paper, can be opened and edited by `draw.io`_.
    | This figure was made with icons created by the users ``imaginationlol`` and ``monkik`` on `flaticon.com`_.
-   | `model_specs.drawio`_
    | Source for Figure 2 in the paper.
    | Can be opened and edited by `draw.io`_.

.. _model_overview.drawio: model_overview.drawio
.. _model_specs.drawio: model_specs.drawio
.. _draw.io: https://draw.io/
.. _flaticon.com: https://flaticon.com/

Example of Basic Usage
============================

Here are some examples of basic usage of the model using Python. For the codes to work, you need to execute them at the root directory of this repository.

Get a list of vocabulary understood by the Model
--------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron

    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    print(nn_model.vocabs)


Give context of a star and request for information
--------------------------------------------------------

Althought our model has a context window of 64 tokens, you do not need to fill up the whole context window.

.. code-block:: python
    
    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron

    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    # give context of two stars
    # [[star1 teff, star1 logg], [star2 teff, star2 logg]]
    nn_model.perceive([[4700., 2.5], [5500, 4.2]], ["teff", "logg"])
    # request for information for them
    print(nn_model.request(["teff"]))

Get an arbitrary Gaia XP spectrum with source_id online and request for information
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from utils.gaia_utils import xp_spec_online
    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron

    # Gaia DR3 source_id as integer
    gdr3_source_id = 2130706307446806144

    bprp_coeffs = xp_spec_online(gdr3_source_id, absolute_flux=False)
    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    # Give the context of a star by giving XP coefficients to the NN model
    nn_model.perceive(np.concatenate([bprp_coeffs["bp"][:32], bprp_coeffs["rp"][:32]]), [*[f"bp{i}" for i in range(32)], *[f"rp{i}" for i in range(32)]])
    # Request for information like teff, logg, m_h
    print(nn_model.request(["teff", "logg", "m_h"]))

Plot XP spectrum from stellar parameters
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import pylab as plt
    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron
    from utils.gaia_utils import nn_xp_coeffs_phys, xp_sampling_grid

    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    # to generate a spectrum from stellar parameters
    # absolute_flux boolean flag if you want to get spectra in flux at 10 parsec or flux normalized by overall G-band flux
    # other keywords are not mandatory, but you can specify them if you want to as long as they are in the vocabs
    spectrum = nn_xp_coeffs_phys(nn_model, absolute_flux=True, teff=4700., logg=2.5, m_h=0.0, logebv=-7)

    plt.plot(xp_sampling_grid, spectrum)
    plt.xlabel("Wavelength ($nm$)")
    plt.ylabel("Flux at 10 pc ($W nm^{-1} m^{-2}$)")
    plt.xlim(392, 992)
    plt.show()

Authors
===========

-  | **Henry Leung** - henrysky_
   | Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto
   | Contact Henry: henrysky.leung [at] utoronto.ca

-  | **Jo Bovy** - jobovy_
   | Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto
   | Contact Jo: bovy [at] astro.utoronto.ca

.. _henrysky: https://github.com/henrysky
.. _jobovy: https://github.com/jobovy

License
---------
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the `LICENSE`_ file for details

.. _LICENSE: LICENSE

Commit message:

task of topk stars searching with contrastive loss

README.rst, after:

Abstract
===========

[to be written]

Getting Started
================

This repository is to make sure all figures and results are reproducible by anyone easily for this paper🤗.

If Github has issue (or too slow) to load the Jupyter Notebooks, you can go
http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/henrysky/astroNN_stars_foundation/tree/main/

Dependencies
----------------

This project uses `astroNN`_ and `MyGaiaDB`_ to manage `APOGEE`_ and `Gaia`_ data respectively, `PyTorch`_ as the deep learning framework. 
`mwdust`_ and `extinction`_ are used to calculate extinctions. `XGBoost`_ as a baseline machine learning method for comparison.

.. _astroNN: https://github.com/henrysky/astroNN
.. _MyGaiaDB: https://github.com/henrysky/MyGaiaDB
.. _APOGEE: https://www.sdss4.org/dr17/irspec/
.. _Gaia: https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dr3
.. _mwdust: https://github.com/jobovy/mwdust
.. _extinction: https://github.com/kbarbary/extinction
.. _XGBoost: https://github.com/dmlc/xgboost

..

    ⚠️ If you are using ``astroNN`` in the data reduction process which we did here, you have to set ``magicnumber = nan`` in astroNN `configuration file`_ for the code here to work properly.

.. _configuration file: https://astronn.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quick_start.html#configuration-file

Jupyter Notebooks
--------------------------------------------------------

-   | `Dataset_Reduction.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to generate the dataset used by this paper. 
    | Terabytes of (mostly gaia) data need to be downloaded in the process to construct the datasets.
-   | `Inference_Spec2Labels.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar spectra to stellar parameters.
-   | `Inference_Labels2Spec.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar parameters to stellar spectra.
-   | `Inference_Spec2Spec.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar spectra to stellar spectra.
-   | `Inference_Labels2Labels.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code to do inference on tasks of stellar parameters to stellar parameters.
-   | `Task_TopKSearch.ipynb`_
    | The notebook contains code for an example of how our model can act as a Foundation model.
    | Our trained model will be fine-tuned with contrastive objective to do a stars similarity searching task.

.. _Dataset_Reduction.ipynb: Dataset_Reduction.ipynb
.. _Inference_Spec2Labels.ipynb: Inference_Spec2Labels.ipynb
.. _Inference_Labels2Spec.ipynb: Inference_Labels2Spec.ipynb
.. _Inference_Spec2Spec.ipynb: Inference_Spec2Spec.ipynb
.. _Inference_Labels2Labels.ipynb: Inference_Labels2Labels.ipynb
.. _Task_TopKSearch.ipynb: Task_TopKSearch.ipynb

Python Script
--------------------------------------------------------

If you use this training script to train your own model, please notice that details of your system will be 
saved in the model file as ``training_system_info.txt`` for developers to debug. Delete the file before
you share your model with others if you concern about privacy. 

-   | `training.py`_
    | Python script to train the model.

.. _training.py: training.py

Models
--------------------------------------------------------

-   | ``model_torch`` is a trained `PyTorch`_ model
    | The model has ~8.8 millions parameters trained on ~16 millions "non-linear" tokens from ~397k stars with 118 unque "unit vector" tokens.
-   | ``model_torch_search`` is a trained `PyTorch`_ model
    | The model is fine-tuned on the main model to do a stars similarity searching task between spectra and parameters as a demonstration of how our model can act as a Foundation model.

.. _PyTorch: https://pytorch.org/

Graphics 
--------------------------------------------------------

All these graphics can be opened and edited by `draw.io`_.

-   | `model_overview.drawio`_
    | Source for Figure 1 in the paper, 
-   | `model_specs.drawio`_
    | Source for Figure 2 in the paper.
-   | `model_foundation_showcase.drawio`_
    | Source for Figure 18 in the paper.

.. _model_overview.drawio: model_overview.drawio
.. _model_specs.drawio: model_specs.drawio
.. _model_foundation_showcase.drawio: model_foundation_showcase.drawio
.. _draw.io: https://draw.io/
.. _flaticon.com: https://flaticon.com/

Example of Basic Usage
============================

Here are some examples of basic usage of the model using Python. For the codes to work, you need to execute them at the root directory of this repository.

Get a list of vocabulary understood by the Model
--------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron

    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    print(nn_model.vocabs)


Give context of a star and request for information
--------------------------------------------------------

Althought our model has a context window of 64 tokens, you do not need to fill up the whole context window.

.. code-block:: python
    
    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron

    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    # give context of two stars
    # [[star1 teff, star1 logg], [star2 teff, star2 logg]]
    nn_model.perceive([[4700., 2.5], [5500, 4.2]], ["teff", "logg"])
    # request for information for them
    print(nn_model.request(["teff"]))

Get an arbitrary Gaia XP spectrum with source_id online and request for information
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from utils.gaia_utils import xp_spec_online
    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron

    # Gaia DR3 source_id as integer
    gdr3_source_id = 2130706307446806144

    bprp_coeffs = xp_spec_online(gdr3_source_id, absolute_flux=False)
    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    # Give the context of a star by giving XP coefficients to the NN model
    nn_model.perceive(np.concatenate([bprp_coeffs["bp"][:32], bprp_coeffs["rp"][:32]]), [*[f"bp{i}" for i in range(32)], *[f"rp{i}" for i in range(32)]])
    # Request for information like teff, logg, m_h
    print(nn_model.request(["teff", "logg", "m_h"]))

Plot XP spectrum from stellar parameters
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import pylab as plt
    from stellarperceptron.model import StellarPerceptron
    from utils.gaia_utils import nn_xp_coeffs_phys, xp_sampling_grid

    nn_model = StellarPerceptron.load("./model_torch/", device="cpu")
    # to generate a spectrum from stellar parameters
    # absolute_flux boolean flag if you want to get spectra in flux at 10 parsec or flux normalized by overall G-band flux
    # other keywords are not mandatory, but you can specify them if you want to as long as they are in the vocabs
    spectrum = nn_xp_coeffs_phys(nn_model, absolute_flux=True, teff=4700., logg=2.5, m_h=0.0, logebv=-7)

    plt.plot(xp_sampling_grid, spectrum)
    plt.xlabel("Wavelength ($nm$)")
    plt.ylabel("Flux at 10 pc ($W nm^{-1} m^{-2}$)")
    plt.xlim(392, 992)
    plt.show()

Authors
===========

-  | **Henry Leung** - henrysky_
   | Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto
   | Contact Henry: henrysky.leung [at] utoronto.ca

-  | **Jo Bovy** - jobovy_
   | Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto
   | Contact Jo: bovy [at] astro.utoronto.ca

.. _henrysky: https://github.com/henrysky
.. _jobovy: https://github.com/jobovy

License
---------
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the `LICENSE`_ file for details

.. _LICENSE: LICENSE
